FR #982: Clarify EffectiveCost column semantics across all use cases (#1239)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/datasets/cost_and_usage/columns/effectivecost.md

# Effective Cost

> Effective Cost represents the sum of [*amortized*](#glossary:amortization) upfront fees, amortized recurring fees, and Non-prepaid costs of the [*charge*](#glossary:charge) after applying all reduced rates, discounts, and the applicable portion of applicable pre-payment (one-time or recurring) that covered this charge. The amortized portion included should be proportional to the [Pricing Quantity](#pricingquantity) and the time granularity of the data. Since amortization breaks down and spreads the cost of a prepaid purchase, to subsequent eligible *charges*, the Effective Cost of the original prepaid *charge* is set to 0. Effective Cost does not mix or "blend" costs across multiple charges of the same [*service*](#glossary:service). This cost is denominated in the [Billing Currency](#billingcurrency). The Effective Cost is commonly utilized to track and analyze spending trends from a usage perspective.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Effective Cost represents the sum of [*amortized*](#glossary:amortization) upfront fees, amortized recurring fees, drawdown portion, and non-prepaid costs of the [*charge*](#glossary:charge) after applying all reduced rates, discounts, and the applicable portion of applicable pre-payment (one-time or recurring) that covered this charge. The amortized portion included should be proportional to the [Pricing Quantity](#pricingquantity) and the time granularity of the data. Since drawdown and amortization break down and spread the cost of a prepaid purchase to subsequent eligible *charges*, the Effective Cost of the original prepaid *charge* is set to 0. Effective Cost does not mix or "blend" costs across multiple charges of the same [*service*](#glossary:service). This cost is denominated in the [Billing Currency](#billingcurrency). The Effective Cost is commonly utilized to track and analyze spending trends from a usage perspective.
```

> Effective Cost represents the sum of [*amortized*](#glossary:amortization) upfront fees, amortized recurring fees, and Non-prepaid costs of the [*charge*](#glossary:charge) after applying all reduced rates, discounts, and the applicable portion of applicable pre-payment (one-time or recurring) that covered this charge. The amortized portion included should be proportional to the [Pricing Quantity](#pricingquantity) and the time granularity of the data. Since amortization breaks down and spreads the cost of a prepaid purchase, to subsequent eligible *charges*, the Effective Cost of the original prepaid *charge* is set to 0. Effective Cost does not mix or "blend" costs across multiple charges of the same [*service*](#glossary:service). This cost is denominated in the [Billing Currency](#billingcurrency). The Effective Cost is commonly utilized to track and analyze spending trends from a usage perspective.

Author: **Refactored Effective Cost definition**

This version starts with a conceptual explanation of what Effective Cost represents, before detailing calculation mechanics. It aligns terminology and structure with the Billed Cost definition, and outlines similarities and differences across key aspects and use cases.
See Effective Cost supporting content for a side-by-side conceptual comparison of the latest Billed and Effective Cost definitions, including discussion points.

```suggestion
Effective Cost represents the accrual-based cost associated with a [*charge*](#glossary:charge) (cost recognized when the resource or service is consumed rather than on a cash-basis), inclusive of all applicable reduced unit prices and discounts, while excluding any portions of cost designated to cover associated eligible *charges*. Each *charge* is treated as a whole, with all applicable discounts applied uniformly to the entire *charge*. This cost is denominated in the [Billing Currency](#billingcurrency). Effective Cost is commonly used to track and analyze spending trends from a usage perspective and for accrual-based reporting, providing insight into the cost of [*resources*](#glossary:resource) or [*services*](#glossary:service) regardless of invoice timing.

From the perspective of cost coverage, a *charge* may be:

* Independent: not covered by or designated to cover other *charges*; its total cost is both recognized and directly invoiced on the *charge* itself.
* Covered by other *charges*: its cost is recognized on the *charge* itself, but may be fully or partially invoiced on other *charges*.
* Designated to cover other eligible *charges*: its cost is not recognized on the *charge* itself, but is designated to offset the invoiced cost of other eligible *charges*.
* Both: a *charge* may be simultaneously covered by other *charges* and designated to cover other eligible *charges*.

While coverage by other *charges* may be partial or full, designation to cover other eligible *charges* applies to the *charge* in its entirety. A *charge* may be covered by multiple related purchase records, but the coverage must not "blend" costs from mutually unrelated purchases (e.g., purchases for different commitments or marketplace offerings).

For independent *charges*, the Effective Cost equals the  [Billed Cost](#billedcost). If a *charge* is covered by other *charges*, its Effective Cost reflects the total cost recognized on this *charge*, which equals the sum of any Billed Cost invoiced directly on it, along with the portions of cost invoiced on related one-time or recurring purchases (e.g., commitment purchases or marketplace offerings) that are attributed to cover this *charge*. Those attributed portions of cost invoiced on related purchases should be proportional to this *charge's* Pricing Quantity. If a *charge* is designated to cover associated eligible *charges*, its Effective Cost is zero, as its cost is accrued based on the consumption of resources or services and recognized in those associated *charges*.
```

> Effective Cost represents the sum of [*amortized*](#glossary:amortization) upfront fees, amortized recurring fees, and Non-prepaid costs of the [*charge*](#glossary:charge) after applying all reduced rates, discounts, and the applicable portion of applicable pre-payment (one-time or recurring) that covered this charge. The amortized portion included should be proportional to the [Pricing Quantity](#pricingquantity) and the time granularity of the data. Since amortization breaks down and spreads the cost of a prepaid purchase, to subsequent eligible *charges*, the Effective Cost of the original prepaid *charge* is set to 0. Effective Cost does not mix or "blend" costs across multiple charges of the same [*service*](#glossary:service). This cost is denominated in the [Billing Currency](#billingcurrency). The Effective Cost is commonly utilized to track and analyze spending trends from a usage perspective.

Reviewer 2: Would the *use* of an upfront commitment/drawdown purchase, paid on first hour of its term, equally distributed over all months, and available for variably consumption be captured  in EffectiveCost?

Author: If the Payment Model is All-Upfront, we typically expect the following:

- A purchase record (likely a single one) where the BilledCost equals the full amount of that commitment, and EffectiveCost is set to zero, as it is **designated to cover other charges**.
- Multiple corresponding usage records where BilledCost is zero (All-Upfront thus fully **covered by other charge(s),** i.e., invoiced on the associated charge) and EffectiveCost reflects the total cost recognized on this charge (i.e., actual consumption).
- If there is Unused Usage at the end of the commitment interval (e.g., Hour, Day, Month -  I assume in your example the interval is Monthly), we expect a charge with BilledCost set to zero ((All-Upfront thus fully **covered by other charge(s),**) and EffectiveCost reflecting the portion that remained unused.

---

In this [sheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1xG_NbI4O2xg2KHKPB5W2LLUtcfhZPyAaisgoL12m3mY/edit?gid=1641382703#gid=1641382703) you'll find some sample scenarios for All-Upfront, No-Upfront, and Partial-Upfront models that we've discussed in meetings.

In addition, I've included examples from the [FOCUS Sandbox](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1PWw4K3E6BT5ZVq8CrPd3TbGq1Cs59i5wvRgmFvj03Rg/edit?gid=799347756#gid=799347756) and [FOCUS Spec](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1PWw4K3E6BT5ZVq8CrPd3TbGq1Cs59i5wvRgmFvj03Rg/edit?gid=844102722#gid=844102722)

* When ChargeCategory is not "Usage" or "Purchase", EffectiveCost adheres to the following additional requirements:
  * EffectiveCost of a *charge* calculated based on other *charges* (e.g., when the ChargeCategory is "Tax") MUST be calculated based on the EffectiveCost of those related *charges*.
  * EffectiveCost of a *charge* unrelated to other *charges* (e.g., when the ChargeCategory is "Credit") MUST match the [BilledCost](#billedcost).

> * The sum of EffectiveCost where ChargeCategory is "Usage" MUST equal the sum of BilledCost where ChargeCategory is "Purchase" for a given [CommitmentDiscountId](#commitmentdiscountid).

Author: ---

One of the normative requirements (introduced in v1.2) provides no clear added value in its present form. The issue appears to have originated during the refinement of Column Normative Requirements in version 1.2.

**FOCUS 1.2:**

> * *Charges* for a given [CommitmentDiscountId](#commitmentdiscountid) adhere to the following additional requirements:
>   * ...
>   * The sum of EffectiveCost where ChargeCategory is "Usage" MUST equal the sum of EffectiveCost where ChargeCategory is "Usage" and [CommitmentDiscountStatus](#commitmentdiscountstatus) is "Used", plus the sum of EffectiveCost where ChargeCategory is "Usage" and CommitmentDiscountStatus is "Unused".

For context, the original version of the requirement (v1.1) is provided below. While the original phrasing was somewhat unclear, the attempt to interpret and improve it appears to have led to a misrepresentation of its intended logic.

**FOCUS 1.1:**

> In cases where the [ChargeCategory](#chargecategory) is not "Usage" or "Purchase", the following applies:
> * ...
> * When CommitmentDiscountStatus is "Unused", the EffectiveCost MUST be the total committed cost consumed for the given charge period minus related usage charges.

---

@rileyjenk In this suggestion, I removed the problematic requirement. I am not saying this is the final solution - this still needs to be discussed. The idea of this suggestion is to highlight the problem and trigger further conversation.

Suggested approach:

- Revisit and clarify the original intent behind the v1.1 requirement.
- Reformulate it more clearly, if still relevant.
- Decide on the removal of the v1.2 requirement.

Reviewer: I suggest we write this either separately for 'amortization' cases and 'drawdown' cases OR unify it to talk about in terms of covered usage charges for prepayments.

The reason to do drawdown separately would be that it can additionally call out the purchase and usage records may show up from different sources (providers).
